Prophase I: prophase I is very similar to prophase of mitosis, but with one very significant difference. In Prophase I, the nuclear envelope breaks down, the chromosomes condense, and the centrioles begin to migrate to opposite poles of the cell, with the spindle fibers growing between them. During this time, the homologous chromosomes form pairs. These homologous chromosomes line up gene-for-gene down their entire length, allowing crossingover to occur. This is an important step in creating genetic variation and will be discussed later. Metaphase I: In metaphase I, the 23 pairs of homologous chromosomes line up along the equator of the cell. During mitosis, 46 individual chromosomes line up during metaphase. Some chromosomes inherited from the father are facing one side of the cell, and some are facing the other side. Anaphase I: During anaphase I the spindle fibers shorten, and the homologous chromosome pairs are separated from each other. One chromosome from each pair moves toward one pole, with the other moving toward the other pole, resulting in a cell with 23 chromosomes at one pole and the other 23 at the other pole. The sister chromatids remain attached at the centromere. Because human cells have 23 pairs of chromosomes, this independent assortment of chromosomes produces 223, or 8,388,608 possible configurations. More on independent assortment of chromosomes will be presented in the chapter on Mendelian Genetics. Telophase I: The spindle fiber disassembles and the nucleus reforms. This is quickly followed by cytokinesis and the formation of two haploid cells, each with a unique combination of chromosomes, some from the father and the rest from the mother. After cytokinesis, both cells immediately enter meiosis II; the DNA is not copied in between. Meiosis II is essentially the same as mitosis, separating the sister chromatids from each other. Prophase II: Once again the nucleus breaks down, and the spindle begins to reform as the centrioles move to opposite sides of the cell. Metaphase II: The spindle fibers align the 23 chromosomes, each made out of two sister chromatids, along the equator of the cell. Anaphase II: The sister chromatids are separated and move to opposite poles of the cell. As the chromatids separate, each is known as a chromosome. Anaphase II results in a cell with 23 chromosomes at each end of the cell; each chromosome contains half as much genetic material as at the start of anaphase II. Telophase II: The nucleus reforms and the spindle fibers break down. Each cell undergoes cytokinesis, producing four haploid cells, each with a unique combination of genes and chromosomes.
