A theory is also a possible explanation for a law. A scientific law (a statement that summarizes the results of many observations and experiments) describes an observed pattern in data that occurs without any known exception, for example, Newton's laws of motion. A scientific law that has withstood the test of time is incorporated into the field of knowledge. Because they explain the patterns described in laws, theories can be used to predict future events. In this video a teacher discusses the difference between a theory and a law:  Experimentation The scientific method requires that observations be made. Sometimes the phenomenon we wish to observe does not occur in nature or is inconvenient for us to observe. If we can arrange for the phenomenon to occur at our convenience, we can control other variables and have all of our measuring instruments on hand to help us make observations. An experiment is a controlled method of testing a hypothesis under the conditions we want at a time and place of our choosing. When scientists conduct experiments, they are usually seeking new information or trying to verify someone else's data. In comparison, classroom experiments often demonstrate and verify information that is already known to scientists but may be new to students. Suppose a scientist observed two pools of water in bowl-shaped rocks that are located near each other while walking along the beach on a very cold day following a rainstorm. One of the pools was partially covered with ice, while the other pool had no ice on it. The unfrozen pool seemed to contain sea water that splashed up on the rock from the surf, but the other pool was too high up for seawater to splash in and was most likely filled with only rainwater. Since both pools were at the same temperature, the scientist wondered why one pool was partially frozen and the other was not. By tasting the water (not a good idea), the scientist determined that the unfrozen pool tasted saltier than the partially frozen one. The scientist thought perhaps salt water had a lower freezing point than freshwater, so she decided to go home to test her hypothesis. In order to test this hypothesis, the scientist will conduct an experiment during which she can make accurate observations. So far, the scientist has identified a question, gathered a small amount of data, and suggested a hypothesis. For the experiment, the scientist prepared two identical containers of fresh water and added some salt to one of them. A thermometer was placed in each container, and both containers were placed in a freezer. The scientist then observed the conditions and temperatures of the two liquids at regular intervals (see the tables below).
