Religion and faith are terms that are many times used interchangeably; however when we look at the basic difference between the private belief (faith) and the public definition (religion) we can begin to identify differences between the two and in turn count the number of religions. With that in mind, the purpose of the unit was to cover the basics of five of the major world religions. It is not intended to be an advance religious study, but an overview with links to gain more depth. Below you will find a short description and a link to a few more religions that have important connections to the five we covered with more depth. A basic familiarity with each will help us understand many things in history and our current world much better. Taoism (Daoism) Taoism (or Daoism)is deeply rooted in the Chinese customs and worldviews. Taoism is a set of ancient traditions and philosophies of how to live. The focus is on the Tao or the way, the Tao is seen as a universal principle, where all things are united or connected. The following details are courtesy of the BBC Religions webpage: Taoism originated in China 2000 years ago It is a religion of unity and opposites; Yin and Yang. The principle of Yin Yang sees the world as filled with complementary forces action and non-action, light and dark, hot and cold, and so on The Tao is not God and is not worshipped. Taoism includes many deities, that are worshipped in Taoist temples, they are part of the universe and depend, like everything, on the Tao Taoism promotes: achieving harmony or union with nature the pursuit of spiritual immortality being 'virtuous' (but not ostentatiously so) self-development Taoist practices include: meditation feng shui fortune telling reading and chanting of scriptures Shinto Shinto is the Japanese devotion to the spiritual beings and powers called kami. This devotion is displayed in various rituals that are performed at shrines. The focus is performing the rituals that allow humans to communicate with kami. Kami is not a God or gods, they are spirits. They are interested in our well being and want us to be happy. If the spirits are treated correctly, they will intervene in people's lives in a manner that benefits them. The practice of Shinto is very localized. Many followers are more likely to focus on their local shrine and not be as concerned with the religion as a whole. Among the Japanese people, Shinto is not seen as a religion, rather an aspect of life. The following details are courtesy of the BBC Religions webpage: The name Shinto comes from Chinese characters for Shen('divine being'), and Tao ('way') and means 'Way of the Spirits'. Shrine visiting and taking part in festivals play a great part in binding local communities together. Shrine visiting at New Year is the most popular shared national event in Japan. Because Shinto is focussed on the land of Japan it is clearly an ethnic religion. Therefore Shinto is little interested in  Shinto sees human beings as basically good and has no concept of original sin, or of humanity as 'fallen'. Everything, including the spiritual, is experienced as part ofthis world. Shinto has no place for any transcendental other world. Shinto has no canonical scriptures. Shinto teaches important ethical principles but has no commandments.
