with women's desires for equal employment rights; yet the longterm trend of women working outside the home became a reality. Increased rights for African Americans during the decade of the Depression was a contradiction because although President Roosevelt tried to promote racial equality, he stopped short of a commitment for full civil rights. Through the President's appointment of Mary McLeod Bethune to head a special department of the National Youth Administration, Mexican-Americans also supported FDR's administration even though, as a group, they received fewer benefits than did African Americans. Because many Mexican-Americans worked on farms and the farming industry wasn't protected by state or federal laws. With no support at the state or federal level for guaranteed wages or protection for unions, farm workers ended up working for pennies per hour with no union to fight for them. Perhaps the group that experienced the most support from the New Deal were the Indigenous Peoples. Strong government support through the strengthening of land claims helped place reservation lands back into the hands of tribal leadership. Many Indigenous Peoples who valued tribal traditions saw the transfer of land as a giant step forward. Although results were mixed for minority groups, most backed the President because the general consensus was that the Democratic Party would continue to move rights for each group forward. Many saw one of FDR's greatest achievements as his creation of a New Deal Coalition. This alignment of diverse groups of people including Southern whites, various urban groups, African Americans, unionized industrial workers, and many others shared one common goal: to support the Democratic Party--not only with regard to the U presidency, but in the U Congress as well. Other Groups Receive Assistance Another large group to receive assistance through the establishment of various programs was comprised of youth, professionals, and workers. One of the largest programs was the Works Progress Administration. The WPA created as many jobs as possible employing more than 8 million persons between 1935 and 1943. Workers built airports, constructed and repaired roads, built libraries, schools, and hospitals and female WPA workers sewed over 300 million garments for those in need. Professional workers were also employed by the WPA to create music and art, construct city guides, paint murals, and perform in theater troops providing entertainment across the country. Meanwhile, Eleanor Roosevelt was pushing her husband to create relief programs for younger Americans who had also suffered during the Depression. Mrs. Roosevelt worried that long-term unemployment and poverty would undermine young Americans' faith in democracy. She told The New York Times that "I live in real terror when I think we may be losing this generation. We have got to bring these young people into the active life of the community and make them feel that they are  The National Youth Administration (NYA) was created shortly thereafter, to help young people by providing aid and employment by providing grants to high school and college students in exchange for work. Secondly, for young people who were both unemployed and not in school, the NYA combined economic relief with on-the-job training in federally funded work projects designed to provide youth with marketable skills for the future. Social Security One of the most influential programs that was enacted as a part of the New Deal was the Social Security Act of 1935. The Great Depression had far reaching effects on all sectors of the economy and on all portions of the population. Often the first to be laid-off, elderly Americans were hit especially hard by during the Depression. In addition, less than ten percent of Americans had access to private pension plans through their employers. Hence the Depression, led to a situation in which many older Americans, could not sufficiently provide for their needs. The Social Security Act (SSA) aimed to provide some financial security to older Americans, as well as unemployed workers, those with disabilities and impoverished children.
