John F. Kennedy visits Brandenburg Gate on June 26, 1963. Source:  While the Cold War remained heated in Europe, events flared up again in Cuba. After the failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion, Cuban President Fidel Castro had struck a deal with the Soviets to place nuclear missiles on the island in case of another invasion and during the summer of 1962, Soviet weapons (including nuclear missiles) flowed into Cuba. On October 14,1962, American intelligence discovered the activity which sparked the Cuban Missile Crisis. Aerial photographs showed that intermediate-range and mediate-range ballistic nuclear missiles (some of which were in ready to launch mode) had been installed throughout the island. On October 22nd, President Kennedy delivered a message to the American people. You can see it in Interactive 10 For the next six days the world watched with fear as the Interactive 10 Kennedy's Address on Cuba Khrushchev were criticised harshly for their actions during the crisis. Castro closed Cuba's doors by 1973, sharply reducing exit permits from Cuba, separating generations of Cubans from their Cuban-American relatives. After the close call with potential nuclear warfare and the realization of the gravity of split-second decisions, the president worked to tone down his hard-line stance. In the spring of 1963, he established a hot line between the Kremlin and the White House which enabled both leaders to communicate immediately situation continued to play out. The U watched intensely as Soviet ships headed toward Cuba with what many believed to contain additional nuclear missiles while the U Navy began to plan to execute a quarantine of Cuba in order to prevent Soviet cargo from reaching the island. Finally, a break occurred when should another crisis occur. Kennedy worked towards limiting the number nuclear bombs being tested. Intelligence provided both Americans and Soviets that the testing of these weapons proved harmful to the environment. On August 5, 1963, President Kennedy signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty with the Soviet Union, and Great Britain. Although testing was not entirely Soviet premier Khrushchev agreed to remove all missiles from Cuba and Kennedy agreed not to invade the island. Kennedy also secretly removed missiles from Turkey as part of the agreement. Nuclear war between the three countries had been averted but the effects of the crisis lasted Interactive 10 Who Cares About the Cuban Missile Crisis?
