Variations among plants can also help them with survival, the continuation of life, advantage. Pine seedlings compete for sunlight, water, and soil nutrients. Fast-growing seedlings are more likely to crowd out their slowgrowing neighbors. Most organisms compete for resources such as food, air, water, and space. Variations that make it easier for organisms to find or use a resource are better able to survive. The environment is constantly changing. Sometimes the changes are gradual, as in climate changes. Other changes may be sudden, such as volcanoes, earthquakes, floods, landslides, or violent storms. When an environment changes, some organisms die. Some organisms move to a new environment. Some have variations for better survival. The helpful variations will be inherited by some of the offspring. After many generations, most organisms in that species will have helpful variations. Years ago, when DDT (a poison that kills insects) was used in the environment, a few mosquitoes were resistant to DDT. These mosquitoes with this variation were better suited to survive in an environment that contained DDT. They lived and produced offspring that DDT could not kill. As a result, the population, the number and kind of organisms in an area, of DDT-resistant mosquitoes has grown larger in recent years. The traits inherited by parents are only a part of who they are. Some actions of organisms are learned behaviors from parent organisms and from their environment. These are behaviors learned during an organism's lifetime. Learned behaviors vary from organism to organism. Calves, following their mothers to the water troughs, will soon learn to get there by themselves when they are thirsty. Dogs learn different ways to let their owners know they want to come inside or go outside the house. Some dogs may scratch at the door while other may sit by the door and whine. Learning is important for all organisms because it allows them to change when the environment around them changes. This ability to change or learn a new behavior will help them survive for many years.
