Exercise 3 3: 1. [SC 2001/11 HG1] A bullet fired vertically upwards reaches a maximum height and falls back to the ground. Which one of the following statements is true with reference to the acceleration of the bullet during its motion, if air resistance is ignored? The acceleration: a) is always downwards b) is first upwards and then downwards c) is first downwards and then upwards d) decreases first and then increases 2. [IEB 2002/11 HG1] Two balls, P and Q, are simultaneously thrown into the air from the same height above the ground. P is thrown vertically upwards and Q vertically downwards with the same initial speed. Which of the following is true of both balls just before they hit the ground? (Ignore any air resistance. Take downwards as the positive  Velocity Acceleration The same The same P has a greater velocity than Q P has a negative acceleration; Q has a positive acceleration P has a greater velocity than Q The same The same P has a negative acceleration; Q has a positive acceleration 3. [SC 2003/11] A ball X of mass m is projected vertically upwards at a speed ux from a bridge 20 mhigh. A ball Y of mass 2m is projected vertically downwards from the same bridge at a speed of uy . The two balls reach the water at the same speed. Air friction can be ignored. Which of the following is true with reference to the speeds with which the balls are projected? a) ux = 1 uy b) ux = uy c) ux = 2uy d) ux = 4uy 4. [SC 2002/03 HG1] A stone falls freely from rest from a certain height. Which one of the following quantities could be represented on the y-axis of the graph below? a) velocity b) acceleration c) momentum d) displacement 5. A stone is thrown vertically upwards and it returns to the ground. If friction is ignored, its acceleration as it reaches the highest point of its motion is a) greater than just after it left the throwers hand. b) less than just before it hits the ground. c) the same as when it left the throwers hand. d) less than it will be when it strikes the ground. 6. [IEB 2004/11 HG1] A stone is thrown vertically up into the air. Which of the following graphs best shows the resultant force exerted on the stone against time while it is in the air? (Air resistance is  7. What is the velocity of a ball just as it hits the ground if it is thrown upward at 10 ms 1 from a height 5 meters above the ground? 8. [IEB 2002/11 HG1 Bouncing Ball] A ball bounces vertically on a hard surface after being thrown vertically up into the air by a boy standing on the ledge of a building. Just before the ball hits the ground for the first time, it has a velocity of magnitude 15 ms 1. Immediately, after bouncing, it has a velocity of magnitude 10 ms 1.
