Political gains were made as well. By the beginning of the new decade, (1970), it was estimated that two-thirds of African Americans eligible to vote were registered to do so thus increasing the number of African American elected officials. Many civil rights activists went on to seek political leadership positions such as the Reverend Jesse Jackson who ran for president in 1988 and Andrew Young who served as an ambassador to the United Nations as well as the mayor of Atlanta. Work that Lie Ahead From the standpoint of the repeal of many discriminatory laws, the civil rights movement had been quite successful. However, as the decade of the 70s emerged, the challenges for the movement that lay ahead were quite different. Overcoming housing and job discrimination, educational inequality, racism, and poverty involved the much more difficult task of changing people's attitudes and ultimately, their behavior. It was at this point where public support for the movement declined as some whites were frightened by riots and what many saw as the militant message of the Black Panthers. As many whites continued the trend of moving to suburbs and leaving cities behind, de facto segregation became a greater problem. By 1990, much of the progress that had been made by the elimination of de jure segregation in public schools had been undone by de facto segregation. A lack of jobs continued to remain a serious problem for African Americans whose poverty rate was three times greater than that for whites. As education and jobs were the largest issues, in the 1960s, the government had begun to promote affirmative action programs--programs that required special efforts to hire or in the case of education, enroll groups that had experienced discrimination of some type in the past. Many colleges and companies seeking to do business of some sort with the federal government adopted these programs. By the late 1970s, some began criticizing these programs as they saw them as reverse discrimination programs asserting that hiring or enrollment quotas deprived whites of opportunities. In the 1980s, affirmative-action requirements had been eased for some government contractors and debate continues even today as the fate of affirmative action programs has yet to be determined. And while the legacy of the civil rights movement continues to be an ongoing debate, one tenant that is not debated is that in all regions of the United States today, African Americans and whites interact daily on a level that could only have been imagined or dreamed about before the civil rights movement began.
