QUESTIONS TO GUIDE INQUIRY 1. Do any of the causes of WWI still pose foreign policy issues or problems for the U 2. What can be learned about the changes in American character from the manner in which the U mobilized, prepared, and participated in a world war both at home and abroad? 3. How did the geography of Europe impact WWI warfare? 4. To what extent should the victors of a war be permitted to structure a post-war peace? TERMS, PLACES, PEOPLE Triple Entente Triple Alliance Militarism Nationalism The Causes of WWI On June 28, 1914 Gavrillo Princip, a young Serbian Nationalist, leveled his pistol and fired two shots at the Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his young wife Sophie. As an angry crowd tackled him to the ground and beat him, not even he could imagine the chain of events that these two shots would set off around the world. Long before these shots echoed out in Serbia, a perfect storm of forces was laying the groundwork for what would become the first truly global conflict the world had ever seen. World War I, The Great War, or as it was optimistically, and rather naively known, The War to End All Wars, pitted the Triple Entente, comprised of the Great Britain, France, and Russia, against the Central Powers, made up of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy. These major world powers were joined on both sides by almost one hundred other countries in a conflict fueled largely by swelling militarism, an entangling and chain reacting set of alliances, a fever of imperialism, and chest pounding nationalism in both large and small countries alike. Militarism The United States was not the only country that had spent substantial amounts of time and money expanding its navy and other military forces during the late 1800s and early 1900s. Militarism is the belief or desire of a government or people that a country should maintain a strong military capability and be prepared to use it aggressively to defend or promote national interests. The military buildup was no new game to Great Britain, France, and Germany. Between 1890 and 1913, these powers had more than doubled their defense spending as well as the sizes of their militaries. Militarism is closely tied to imperialism and nationalism, and generally serves as another way for countries to compete against each other, sometimes resulting in an arms race.
