Example 2 For the reactionPCl3(g)+Cl2(g)PCl5(g), which way will the equilibrium shift if: [PCl3] decreases [Cl2] decreases [PCl5] decreases Solution: left left right Effect of Changing Temperature In the previous section, you learned that one of the most important factors that determines reaction rate is temperature. Raising the temperature will increase the average speed of the individual particles, thus causing more frequent collisions. Additionally, this increase in energy means that more particles will have the energy necessary to overcome the activation barrier. Overall, a rise in temperature increases both the frequency of collisions and the percentage of successful collisions. It should be clear that increasing the temperature of the reaction vessel will increase both the forward and reverse reaction rates, but will it increase both rates equally? Let's examine the potential energy diagram of a reaction to see if we can gain any insight there. Here is the potential energy diagram for our usual theoretical reaction: A(g)+B(g)C(g)+D(g) As you can see, the forward reaction has a small energy barrier while the reverse reaction has a very large energy barrier. With the reactants and products at the same temperature, the forward reaction will be much faster that the reverse reaction if the concentration of reactants is equal to the concentration of products. Suppose we were to increase the temperature of the reaction system by 10 degrees C. Both the forward and reverse reaction rates will increase because a higher percentage of reactants and products will have enough energy to overcome the activation barrier. However, the reverse reaction rate will be more drastically affected. The activation barrier for the reverse reaction is so large that very few molecules would be able to overcome the barrier at the lower temperature. When the temperature is raised, there is a significant increase in the number of product molecules that can overcome the activation barrier. On the other hand, the activation barrier for the forward reaction is so small that many of the molecules would be able to overcome the barrier at the lower temperature. When the temperature is raised, there is only a small increase in the number of reactant molecules that can overcome the activation barrier. Thus, the rate of the reverse reaction will increase more dramatically than the rate of the forward reaction. The equilibrium will shift to the left, producing more reactants until a new equilibrium is established. All reactions are either endothermic or exothermic, so there will always be a difference in the activation energy for the forward and reverse reactions. Whenever the temperature is raised, it will add energy to the system and increase both the forward and reverse reaction rates. However, it will more significantly increase the rate of the slower reaction. In an exothermic reaction, the reverse reaction has the higher activation barrier, and is thus slower. When heat is added, the reverse reaction will speed up more than the forward reaction, and the equilibrium will shift to the left. In an endothermic reaction, the forward reaction has the higher activation barrier, and is thus slower. When heat is added, the forward reaction will speed up more than the reverse reaction, and the equilibrium will shift to the right. By looking at a potential energy diagram, you should be able to tell 1) whether the reaction is exothermic or endothermic, 2) whether the forward or reverse reaction would be slower, assuming equal concentrations of reactants and products, and 3) which direction the equilibrium would shift in response to a change in temperature. Following the same reasoning as above, we can see that decreasing the temperature of a reaction produces an equilibrium shift in the opposite direction. Cooling an exothermic reaction results in a shift to the right, and cooling an endothermic reaction causes a shift to the left. Le Chatelier's principle correctly predicts the equilibrium shift when systems are heated or cooled. An increase in temperature is the same as adding energy to the system. Look at the following reaction: 2SO2(g)+O2(g)2SO3(g) H=191 kJ This could also be written as: 2SO2(g)+O2(g)2SO3(g)+191 kJ When changing the temperature of a system at equilibrium, energy can be thought of as just another product or reactant. For this reaction, 191 kJ of energy is produced for every mole of O2 and 2 moles of SO2 that react. Therefore, when the temperature of this system is raised, the effect will be the same as increasing any other product. As the temperature is increased, the equilibrium will shift away from the stress, resulting in more reactants and less products. As you would expect, the reverse would be true if the temperature is decreased. A summary of the effect temperature has on equilibrium systems is shown in the table below: Exothermic (H) Endothermic (+H) Increase Temperature Shifts left, favors reactants Shifts right, favors products Decrease Temperature Shifts right, favors products Shifts left, favors reactants Example 3 Predict the effect on the equilibrium position if the temperature is increased in each of the following: H2(g)+CO2(g)CO(g)+H2O(g)H=+40 kJ 2SO2(g)+O2(g)SO3(g)+energy Solution: The reaction is endothermic. With an increase in temperature for an endothermic reaction, the reaction will shift right, producing more products. The reaction is exothermic. With an increase in temperature for an exothermic reaction, the reaction will shift left, producing more reactants.
