(IEB 2002 Paper 2) 8. Two gas cylinders, A and B, have a volume of 0,15 m3 and 0,20 m3 respectively. Cylinder A contains 35 mol He gas at pressure p and cylinder B contains 40 mol He gas at 5 atm. The ratio of the Kelvin temperatures A is 1,80 Calculate the pressure of the gas (in kPa) in cylinder A. (IEB 2002 Paper 2) 9. A learner investigates the relationship between the Celsius temperature and the pressure of a fixed amount of helium gas in a 500 cm3 closed container. From the results of the investigation, she draws the graph below: pressure (kPa) 10 20 temperature (0C) a) Under the conditions of this investigation, helium gas behaves like an ideal gas. Explain briefly why this is so. b) From the shape of the graph, the learner concludes that the pressure of the helium gas is directly proportional to the Celsius temperature. Is her conclusion correct? Briefly explain your answer. c) Calculate the pressure of the helium gas at 0 C. d) Calculate the mass of helium gas in the container. (IEB 2003 Paper 2) 10. One of the cylinders of a motor car engine, before compression contains 450 cm3 of a mixture of air and petrol in the gaseous phase, at a temperature of 30 C and a pressure of 100 kPa. If the volume of the cylinder after compression decreases to one tenth of the original volume, and the temperature of the gas mixture rises to 140 C, calculate the pressure now exerted by the gas mixture. 11. A gas of unknown volume has a temperature of 14 C. When the temperature of the gas is increased to 100 C, the volume is found to be 5,5 L. What was the initial volume of the gas? 12. A gas has an initial volume of 2600 mL and a temperature of 350 K. a) If the volume is reduced to 1500 mL, what will the temperature of the gas be in Kelvin? b) Has the temperature increased or decreased? c) Explain this change, using the kinetic theory of gases. 13. In an experiment to determine the relationship between pressure and temperature of a fixed mass of gas, a group of learners obtained the following results: Pressure (kPa) 130,5 Temperature (C) Total gas volume (cm3) a) Draw a straight-line graph of pressure (on the dependent, y-axis) versus temperature (on the independent, x-axis) on a piece of graph paper. Plot the points. Give your graph a suitable heading. b) A straight-line graph passing through the origin is essential to obtain a mathematical relationship between pressure and  Extrapolate (extend) your graph and determine the temperature (in C) at which the graph will pass through the temperature axis. c) Write down, in words, the relationship between pressure and Kelvin temperature. d) From your graph, determine the pressure (in kPa) at 173 K. Indicate on your graph how you obtained this value. e) How would the gradient of the graph be affected (if at all) if a larger mass of the gas is used? Write down ONLY increases, decreases or stays the same.
