Visit the site below to find answers to some of these intriguing questions: Interactive 11 Brief History of Race Riots New Leaders on the Scene The anger responsible for most of the riots that had occurred was rooted, in large part, from African American leaders who had revived the belief that African Americans needed to take complete control of their own communities, cultures, and livelihoods. Malcolm X was one of those leaders. Born Malcolm Little on May 19, 1925 in Omaha, Nebraska, Malcolm at the age of 20 was sent to jail for burglary. It was in prison where he studied Islam through the teachings of Elijah Muhammad, the head of the Nation of Islam. By 1952, after his release from prison, Malcolm (now ridding himself of his last name and taking the name of X) had become a minister of Islam, quickly rising in the ranks of the religion's  hierarchy to become one of Muhammad's most famous disciples within the Nation of Islam (NOI) organization. An engaging speaker, Malcolm X openly preached that whites were the cause of the conditions of blacks throughout the country. By 1959, Mike Wallace, a well-known new reporter featured Malcolm X in a week-long television special. Titled, The Hate That Hate Produced, the program explored the fundamental beliefs of the Nation of Islam and showed his rise as one of the NOI's most important leaders. Furthermore, he preached that blacks should separate from white society. By 1964, he was also advocating for armed self-defense by blacks. In March of 1964, due to differences in beliefs about NOI strategy and doctrine, Malcolm left the Nation of Islam and formed another Muslim organization, the Muslim Mosque, Inc. Shortly thereafter he embarked on a pilgrimage to Mecca. While on the pilgrimage, Malcolm's thinking was radically changed when he learned that orthodox Islam preached the equality of all races. Upon his return to the U his attitudes towards whites had changed. By 1965, his new slogan was, Ballots or bullets. As Interactive 11 Malcom Malcolm explained, Well, if X Returns from Mecca you and I don't use the ballot, we're going to be forced to use the bullet. So let us try the ballot. For a clip from one of his press conferences after his return from Mecca, view here: Relations between Malcolm X and his former teacher Muhammad, had grown increasingly volatile. Undercover FBI agents inside the Nation of Islam had become aware of plans to assassinate Malcolm and after repeated attempts on his life, assassins had finally succeeded. On February 21, 1965, while on stage at the Audubon Ballroom in Harlem, speaking to a crowd of 400, he was shot fifteen times by three men; Malcolm X was dead at age 39. The Emergence of Black Power By June of 1966, tensions between SNCC and the other civil rights groups finally exploded in Mississippi. James Meredith (the first black male to integrate the University of Mississippi in 1962) set out on a 220-mile march against fear. Although Meredith's plan was to walk from the Tennessee border to Jackson, Mississippi, he was shot by a white man on the second day of the march and was too injured to continue. Dr. King leading the SCLC, Floyd McKissick of CORE, and Stokely Carmichael of SNCC decided to finish what Meredith has started with their respective marchers. Plans for a unity march between the three organizations went awry soon after it due to militant behavior from SNCC and CORE marchers. Attempts by King to demilitarize the tone by leading marchers in a refrain of We Shall Overcome fell short. Soon after, Carmichael was arrested for setting up a tent on the grounds of an all-black high school which prompted a hasty protest by SNCC marchers. Near the end of the rally, Carmichael, his face swollen from being beaten, emerged on the platform and spoke to the stunned crowd.
