See presentation: 27X4 at  The Arrhenius definition of acids and bases defines an acid as a substance that increases the concentration of hydronium ions (H3O+) in a solution. A base is defined as a substance that increases the concentration of hydroxide ions (OH) in a solution. However, this definition only applies to aqueous solutions (in water). The Brnsted-Lowry definition is much broader. An acid is a substance that donates protons (H+) and a base is a substance that accepts protons. In different reactions, certain substances can act as both an acid and a base. These substances are amphoteric substances. Amphiprotic substances are amphoteric substances that are Brnsted-Lowry acids and bases. Water is both amphoteric and amphiprotic. A conjugate acid-base pair refers to two compounds (one reactant and one product) that differ only by a hydrogen ion (H+) and a charge of +1. A large percentage of molecules in a strong acid or base dissociate or ionise to form ions in solution. Only a small percentage of molecules in a weak acid or base dissociate or ionise to form ions in solution. In a concentrated solution there is a high ratio of dissolved substance to solvent. In a dilute solution there is a low ratio of dissolved substance to solvent. Ka and Kb are the equilibrium constants for the reaction of an acid or a base with water. A large Ka or Kb means that the acid or base is strong. A small Ka or Kb means that the acid or base is weak. When an acid and a base react, they form a salt and water. The salt is made up of a cation from the base and an anion from the acid. An example of a salt is sodium chloride (NaCl), which is the product of the reaction between sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid (HCl). The reaction between an acid and a base is a neutralisation reaction. In the reaction between an acid and a metal the products are a salt and hydrogen. In the reaction between an acid and a metal hydroxide or metal oxide the products are a salt and water. In the reaction between an acid and a metal carbontae or metal hydrogen carbonate the products are a salt, water and carbon dioxide. The pH scale is a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution. It ranges from 0 to 14. Values greater than 7 indicate a base, while those less than 7 indicate an acid. Water ionises to a small extent. Kw is a measure of this auto-ionisation. Kw is 1 1014 at 25 C. An indicator is a compound that is a different colour in a basic solution, an acidic solution, and at the end-point of a reaction. They are used to determine the end-point during a neutralisation reaction. Titrations are the method used to determine the concentration of a known substance using another, standard, solution. Acid-base titrations are an example. Two notable applications of acids and bases are in the chloralkali industry, and in hair products including permanent waving applications, hair relaxers, and hair dyes.
