Electrostatics All objects have positive and negative charges inside them. If the number of positive and negative charges are equal, as they most often are, then the object is neutral. Charged objects are objects with more positive charges than negative ones, or vice versa. Opposite charges attract, and similar charges repel. Electric fields are created by a net charge and point away from positive charges and towards negative charges. Many macroscopic forces can be attributed to the electrostatic forces between molecules and atoms. Charles-Augustin de Coulomb noticed that a force existed between charged particles. He called this force electrical force. This force was different that the gravitational force between objects with mass. The force between charged particles varied directly with the magnitude of the charges and inversely squared to the distance between the particles. For example, particles with a larger charge (either more negatively charged or positively charged) would have a greater force between them, He also noticed that this force between the charges could be either attractive (between opposite charges) or repulsive (between like charges). This is different that gravitational forces, because gravitational force can only be attractive. Similar to the gravitational force, the electrical force follows the inverse squared law with distance. As the distance between the objects increases, the electrical force between the objects decreases. The relationship between charge, distance, and force is called Coulomb's Law. The Coulomb Force Law states that any two charged particles (q1q2) with charge measured in units of Coulombs at a distance r with distance measured in units of meters from each other will experience a force of repulsion or attraction along the line joining them equal to: This looks a lot like the Law of Universal Gravitation, which deals with attraction between objects with mass. It depends on the product of the two charges and obeys the inverse square law for distance. For example, if you double the charge on one of the objects, the force will also double. If you triple the charge on one of the objects, the force will triple. If you double the charge on one object and triple the charge on the other, the force will become six times (2 3 = 6) stronger. This is because the charge and the force are directly proportional. If we double the distance, the force decreases by 1/4. If we triple the distance, the force will decrease by 1/9. This is because the distance and the force are inverse-squared proportional.
