TERMS, PLACES, PEOPLE Camelot Years New Frontier Mandate Peace Corps Alliance for Progress The Years of Camelot On a crisp winter day on January 20th, 1961, John Fitzgerald Kennedy was sworn in as the 35th President of the United States. It was not the official ceremony of the swearing in of the first Catholic president that was the most memorable event of that day--it was the President's inaugural address. We stand today on the edge of a New Frontier, were the words the president used to describe his domestic agenda--one that would ask Americans what they had to give to their country as he proceeded to describe the domestic challenges of the nation. The President's inauguration ushered in a new tone for a new era at the White House. On the podium sat numerous writers, artists, and scientists that the Kennedy  e509232adb3b5e25562523f7bd8fa6 relations events. Along with their young daughter Caroline and infant son John F. Kennedy, J America watched as the youthful and glamorous first family vacationed at the Kennedy Compound in Hyannisport, Massachusetts and lived vicariously at the White House. To many, the first family's daily life was seen as a fairy tale. In addition to promoting the young president's image as a family man, JFK received praise for surrounding himself with young businesspeople and intellectuals as his advisors in the west wing. Those most notable who the president turned to regularly included McGeorge Bundy as a national security adviser, Robert McNamara as secretary of defense, Dean Rusk as secretary of state along with the two individuals he relied most heavily upon for counsel in all matters: Kenneth O'Donnell, a close college friend to both Jack and Bobby Kennedy, and JFK's younger brother, Robert, known as Bobby whom he appointed as Attorney General shortly after he took office. It was Kennedy's inner circle family had invited to give birth to an era of grace, elegance, intelligence, and wit. These qualities would continue throughout the remaining days of the young, charismatic, charming president's tenure in the White House. The Kennedy Mystique There is no question that the American public was fascinated with the first family and both President Kennedy and his beautiful, classy, elegant wife, Jackie were masters of image-shaping public of what became known as the best and brightest that was responsible for the success of Kennedy's embodiment of a politics of idealism and aspiration. The New Frontier President Kennedy had campaigned on a broad vision of progress for the country, calling on Americans to be new pioneers and to embrace exploration as a way of finding solutions to both foreign and domestic challenges. Once president, Kennedy's goal was to transform what had been seen as a broad political agenda into a legislative agenda. Kennedy's domestic program, the New Frontier, was filled with hope for Americans. The domestic program called for the increase of federal funds to education, the raising of the minimum wage, the increase of social security payout, the increase of medical assistance for the elderly, the creation of a department to help urban affairs, and the passage of civil rights legislation. Since Kennedy had won the 1960 by a slim margin he lacked a popular mandate--a concrete indication that the voters approved of his political agenda. His education and medical programs were stalled greatly by a conservative Congress. However, Kennedy had successes with some New Frontier legislation proposals which resulted in a 20% increase in spending for the Department of Defense. Congress also approved an increase in the minimum wage ($1 extended unemployment insurance, and provided financial assistance to cities that reported high rates of America through a foreign aid program known as the Alliance for Progress. Money was spent to build schools, houses, and sanitation facilities to help increase the standard of living in many Latin American countries. Kennedy also pushed for the United States to take lead in the space race. After the Soviet Union launched Sputnik in 1957, Kennedy vowed that the United States would land a man on the moon before the end of the decade in 1961. Congress agreed with Kennedy about the importance of winning the space race and within a few weeks after his address to Congress, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) began constructing launch facilities in Cape Canaveral, Florida along with a mission control center located in Houston, Texas. The first success came on May 5, 1961 when Mercury Freedom 7 launched the first American, Alan B. Shepard J into space. Less than a year later, on February 20, 1962, Colonel John Glenn unemployment.
