industries and were characterized as lower paying jobs since many thought the jobs were to be secondary family income. The Economy of the 1920s  Not all areas of the economy faced the issues confronting the agricultural industry. With the exception of the first few years of the 1920s, as demobilization occurred and veterans of World War I returned home looking for employment, there was great economic prosperity for many Americans. On some levels the Photo of the Model T, 1915, Library of Congress.  As soldiers demobilized after World War I, they returned to the United States and looked to enter the workforce. While unemployment rates were relatively low throughout the decade, male participation in the labor force decreased and women's participation increased. Even though the process of women entering the workplace had started long before the 1920s, there were jobs that were considered by greater society to be acceptable for women's work. World War I saw the need for women to work as secretaries, nurses, and clerks. These so called Pink-Collar professions continued into the 1920s in many US economy, at least in urban areas, benefited the nation's families--providing more income to spend on consumer products like radios, phonographs and vacuum cleaners. The auto industry grew as millions of cars were produced on assembly lines, providing affordable vehicles for many families to purchase. New financial instruments like purchasing items on credit in installment plans allowed Americans to purchase greater quantities of consumer goods. As consumers bought more goods and as industry met the demand for these goods, there was a general increase in Gross National Product (GNP). Typically, a higher GNP per person equates to a higher standard of living for a country, though that is not to imply that this prosperity was equally distributed amongst all people evenly. As a matter of fact, the gap between the wealthy and poor increased during this time period, leading to a superficial prosperity. Rural farms and the urban poor did not reap the same benefits garnered by a relatively few corporations and wealthy individuals. Along with the increase in GNP per Capita, the stock market increased during this time period. New businesses and industries like the automobile and home appliance industries prospered while older industries like the coal industry struggled as it was replaced by gasoline, electric, and natural gas industries. Electrification of homes increased as a result of corporations like Westinghouse and General Electric. Americans spent less money on staples like food and utilities and spent a larger percentage of their incomes on at home appliances, new consumer products like radios, and recreation like the going to the movies. The tourist industry also flourished, partly due to the increased affordability of cars. As electrification increased, especially in urban areas, so did the purchasing of new consumer goods like stoves, washing machines, vacuum cleaners and more. The mechanical refrigerator typified this growth. In 1920, only 2500 refrigerators were manufactured. In 1921, 5,000 mechanical refrigerators were manufactured in the US. By the end of the decade, the number grew to over 1 million.
